Introduction to Python

Python is a high-level, interpreted, general-purpose programming language developed by Guido van Rossum.
It is designed to emphasize code readability and simplicity, allowing programmers to write clear and logical code.

Python supports multiple programming paradigms:

Procedural programming

Object-oriented programming

Functional programming

Because of this flexibility, Python is suitable for both beginners and professionals.
Due to its simplicity and power, Python is widely used in modern software development.

Why Python Is More Popular

Python is one of the most popular programming languages because it is:

Easy to learn

Easy to use

Its syntax is simple and close to the English language, which reduces complexity for programmers.

Python is an interpreted language, so programs can be tested quickly without compilation.
This allows faster development and easier debugging.

The popularity of Python has also increased because of:

Availability of a large number of libraries

Strong community support

Extensive documentation

These advantages have made Python the first choice for many developers and organizations.

Why We Should Use Python

Python should be used because it:

Reduces development time

Improves programmer productivity

Works across multiple platforms

Python is platform independent, meaning the same code can run on:

Windows

Linux

macOS

Python is widely used in:

Web development

Data science

Artificial intelligence

Machine learning

Automation

Internet of Things (IoT)

Because of these applications, Python is a future-oriented language with strong career opportunities.

Features of Python (With Proper Explanation)
4.1 High-Level Language

Python is a high-level language, so programmers do not need to manage hardware-level details such as memory allocation.
This makes coding easier and improves readability.

4.2 Dynamically Typed

Python is dynamically typed, which means variable data types are determined at runtime.
There is no need to declare the data type explicitly, which:

Reduces code length

Increases flexibility

Example:

x = 10
x = "Python"

4.3 Interpreted Language

Python is an interpreted language, where code is executed line by line by the Python interpreter.
This makes debugging easier because:

Errors are detected immediately

Execution stops at the error line

4.4 Object-Oriented

Python supports object-oriented programming (OOP) concepts such as:

Classes

Objects

Inheritance

Encapsulation

Polymorphism

These features help in building:

Reusable programs

Scalable programs

Well-organized code

4.5 Platform Independent

Python programs are platform independent, meaning the same program can run on different operating systems without modification, as long as Python is installed on the system.

4.6 Large Standard Library

Python provides a large standard library that includes modules for:

File handling

Mathematics

Databases

Networking

Other system operations

This reduces the need to write code from scratch.

4.7 Open-Source Language

Python is an open-source and free-to-use language.
Its source code is publicly available, which encourages:

Learning

Collaboration

Continuous improvement

4.8 Large Community Support

Python has a huge global community that provides:

Tutorials

Forums

Documentation

Third-party libraries

This makes learning and problem-solving easier.

4.9 Extensible and Embeddable

Python is extensible, meaning it can be integrated with languages like C and C++ for performance-critical tasks.
Python is also embeddable, meaning it can be embedded into other applications to provide scripting functionality.

How Python Works

Python works using a Python interpreter.

When a Python program is executed:

The interpreter reads the code line by line

Converts the code into bytecode

Executes the bytecode immediately

If an error occurs:

Execution stops

The error message is displayed

This execution model supports:

Fast development

Easy debugging

First Python Program

The first Python program is usually written to display a message on the screen.

print("Hello, World!")


This program prints Hello, World! on the screen and demonstrates Python’s simplicity.

print() Function in Python
Definition

The print() function is a built-in Python function used to display output on the screen during program execution.
It is commonly used to show:

Messages

Results

Debug information

Syntax (Documentation)
print(value, ..., sep=' ', end='\n', file=sys.stdout, flush=False)

Explanation of Parameters

value: Data to be printed (text, number, variable, etc.)

sep: Separator between multiple values (default is space)

end: Specifies what is printed at the end (default is new line)

file: Output destination (default is screen)

flush: Controls immediate output display

Examples of Printing Messages
Example 1: Simple message
print("Welcome to Python")

Example 2: Multiple values
print("Python", "is", "easy")

Example 3: Using separator
print("Python", "is", "easy", sep="-")

Example 4: Same line output
print("Hello", end=" ")
print("World")

Example 5: Multiple lines
print("My name is Valmik")
print("I am learning Python")

Final Revision Summary

Python is a high-level, interpreted, dynamically typed, and platform-independent programming language.
It has simple syntax, rich libraries, and strong community support.

The print() function is used to display output on the screen and is essential for understanding Python program execution.
